---
layout: post
title: "Hands-on with Remodel: a new Python ODM for RethinkDB"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
hero_image: 2014-12-10-remodel_blog.png
---

This week, [Andrei Horak][] released [Remodel][], a new Python-based object
document mapping (ODM) library for RethinkDB. Remodel simplifies RethinkDB
application development by automating much of the underlying logic that comes
into play when working with relations.

[Andrei Horak]: https://github.com/linkyndy
[Remodel]: https://github.com/linkyndy/remodel

Remodel users create high-level model objects and rely on a set of simple class
attributes to define relationships. The framework then uses the model objects
to generate tables and indexes. It abstracts away the need to do manual work
like performing join queries or populating relation attributes when inserting
new items. Remodel also has built-in support for connection pooling, which
obviates the need to create and manage connections. In this brief tutorial,
I'll give you a hands-on look at Remodel and show you how to use it in a web
application.
<!--more-->

# Define your models

To start using Remodel, first install the library. You can use the `setup.py`
included in the source code or you can install it from `pip` by typing `pip
install remodel` at the command line.

For the purposes of this tutorial, let's assume that we want to build a
Starfleet crew roster that correlates crew members with their starships. The
first step is to define the models and create the tables:

```python
import remodel.utils
import remodel.connection
from remodel.models import Model

remodel.connection.pool.configure(db="fleet")

class Starship(Model):
    has_many = ("Crewmember",)

class Crewmember(Model):
    belongs_to = ("Starship",)

remodel.utils.create_tables()
remodel.utils.create_indexes()
```

In an application built with Remodel, all of the model classes must inherit
`remodel.models.Model`. In this application, there are two models: `Starship`
and `Crewmember`. The `has_many` and `belongs_to` class attributes are used to
define the relationships between objects. In this case, each `Starship` can
have many `Crewmember` instances and each `Crewmember` instance belongs to only
one `Starship`.

The `create_tables` and `create_indexes` methods will, as the names suggest,
automatically generate tables and indexes based on your defined models. Remodel
pluralizes your table names, which means that the `Starship` model will get a
`starships` table.

The framework instantiates a connection pool, accessible at
`remodel.connection.pool`. You can use the pool's `configure` method to adjust
its behavior and specify connection options, such as the desired database name,
host, and port.

# Populate the database

Now that the models are defined, you can populate the database with content. To
create a new database record, call the `create` method on one of the model
classes:

```python
voyager = Starship.create(name="Voyager", category="Intrepid", registry="NCC-74656")
```

Remodel doesn't enforce any schemas, so you can use whatever properties you
want when you create a record. The `create` method used above will
automatically add the Voyager record to the `starships` table. Because the
`Starship` model defines a `has_many` relationship with the `Crewmember` model,
the `voyager` record comes with a `crewmembers` property that you can use to
access the collection of crew members that are associated with the ship. Use
the following code to add new crew members:

```python
voyager["crewmembers"].add(
    Crewmember(name="Janeway", rank="Captain", species="Human"),
    Crewmember(name="Neelix", rank="Morale Officer", species="Talaxian"),
    Crewmember(name="Tuvok", rank="Lt Commander", species="Vulcan"))
```

The records provided to the `add` method are instantiated directly from the
`Crewmember` class. You don't want to use the `create` method in this case
because the `add` method called on the Voyager instance handles the actual
database insertion. It will also automatically populate the relation data,
adding a `starship_id` property to each `Crewmember` record.

To make the example more interesting, add a few more `Starship` records to the
database:

```python
enterprise = Starship.create(name="Enterprise", category="Galaxy", registry="NCC-1701-D")
enterprise["crewmembers"].add(
    Crewmember(name="Picard", rank="Captain", species="Human"),
    Crewmember(name="Data", rank="Lt Commander", species="Android"),
    Crewmember(name="Troi", rank="Counselor", species="Betazed"))

defiant = Starship.create(name="Defiant", category="Defiant", registry="NX-74205")
defiant["crewmembers"].add(
    Crewmember(name="Sisko", rank="Captain", species="Human"),
    Crewmember(name="Dax", rank="Lt Commander", species="Trill"),
    Crewmember(name="Kira", rank="Major", species="Bajoran"))
```

# Query the database

When you want to retrieve a record, you can invoke the `get` method on a model
class. When you call the `get` method, you can either provide the ID of the
specific record that you want or you can provide keyword arguments that perform
a query against record attributes. If you want to get a specific starship by
name, for example, you can do the following:

```python
voyager = Starship.get(name="Voyager")
```

You can take advantage of the relations that you defined in your models. If you
want to find all of the human members of Voyager's crew, you can simply use the
`filter` method on the `crewmembers` property:

```python
voyager = Starship.get(name="Voyager")
for human in voyager["crewmembers"].filter(species="Human"):
  print human["name"]
```

Perform filtering on an entire table by calling the `filter` method on a model
class. The following code shows how to display the captain of each ship:

```python
for person in Crewmember.filter(rank="Captain"):
  print person["name"], "captain of", person["starship"]["name"]
```

As you might have noticed, the `starship` property of the `Crewmember` instance
points to the actual `starship` record. Remodel populates the property
automatically to handle the `Crewmember` model's `belongs_to` relationship.

When you want to perform more sophisticated queries, you can use ReQL in
conjunction with Remodel. Let's say that you want to evaluate Starfleet's
diversity by determining how many crew members are of each species. You can use
ReQL's `group` command:

```python
Crewmember.table.group("species").ungroup() \
          .map(lambda item: [item["group"], item["reduction"].count()]) \
          .coerce_to("object").run()
```

The `table` property of a model class provides the equivalent of a ReQL
`r.table` expression. You can chain additional ReQL commands to the `table`
property just as you would when creating any ReQL query.

# Put it all together

Just for fun, I'm going to show you how to build a web application for browsing
the Starfleet crew roster. The app is built with [Flask][], a lightweight
framework for web application development. The example also uses [Jinja][], a
popular server-side templating system that is commonly used with Flask.

[Flask]: http://flask.pocoo.org/
[Jinja]: http://jinja.pocoo.org/

In a Flask application, the developer defines URL routes that are responsible
for displaying specific kinds of information. The application uses templates to
render the data in HTML format. Create a route at the application root:

```python
app = flask.Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def ships():
    return flask.render_template("ships.html", ships=Starship.all())

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="localhost", port=8090, debug=True)
```

When the user visits the site root, the application will fetch all of the
starships from the database and display them by rendering the `ships.html`
template. The following is from the template file:

```html
<ul>
  {% for ship in ships %}
  <li><a href="/ship/{{ ship.id }}">{{ ship.name }}</a></li>
  {% endfor %}
</ul>

```

In the example above, the template iterates over every ship and displays a list
item for each one. The list item includes an anchor tag that points to a URL
with the ship's ID.

To make the application display the crew members of the ship when the user
clicks one of the links, create a new `/ship/x` route that takes an arbitrary
ship ID as a parameter:

```python
@app.route("/ship/<ship_id>")
def ship(ship_id):
    ship = Starship.get(ship_id)
    crew = ship["crewmembers"].all()
    return flask.render_template("ship.html", ship=ship, crew=crew)
```

Fetch the desired ship from the database using the provided ID. In a real-world
application, you might want to check to make sure that the record exists and
throw an error if it doesn't. Once you have the ship, fetch the crew via the
`crewmembers` property. Pass both the ship and the crew to the template:

```html
<h1>{{ ship.name }}</h1>
<ul>
  {% for member in crew %}
  <li><a href="/member/{{ member.id }}">{{ member.name }}</a></li>
  {% endfor %}
</ul>

```

Now create a `/member/x` route so that the user can see additional information
about a crewman when they click one in the list:

```python
@app.route("/member/<member_id>")
def member(member_id):
    member = Crewmember.get(member_id)
    return flask.render_template("crew.html", member=member)
```

Finally, define the template for that route:

```html
<h1>{{ member.name }}</h1>
<ul>
  <li><strong>Rank:</strong> {{ member.rank }}</li>
  <li><strong>Species:</strong> {{ member.species }}</li>
</ul>
```

The template HTML files should go in a `template` folder alongside your Python
script. When you run the Python script, it will start a Flask server at the
desired port. You should be able to visit the URL and see the application in
action.

Check out [Remodel][] and [Install RethinkDB][install] to try it for yourself.

# Resources

* [Remodel source code][Remodel] on GitHub
* [Flask][] web application framework
* The RethinkDB [10-minute guide][guide]

[Remodel]: https://github.com/linkyndy/remodel
[install]: /docs/install/
[Flask]: http://flask.pocoo.org/
[guide]: /docs/guide/javascript/
