---
layout: post
title: "RethinkDB 2.2: atomic changefeeds, parallel scans, optimized runtime"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
---

Today, we're pleased to announce RethinkDB 2.2 (Modern Times). [Download it now][download]!

RethinkDB 2.2 contains over [120 enhancements][release-notes] from more than [20 contributors][release-notes], significantly improves performance, memory usage and scalability, adds new ReQL commands, and ships with atomic changefeed support. Some of the major improvements in the 2.2 release include:

* __Atomic changefeeds__ -- the `changes` command now accepts an `includeInitial` optional argument, which allows atomically reading existing data and processing new results with a [single query](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/3579).
* __Optimized fetches__ -- the `getAll` code path has been [optimized](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/1526) to perform a single network round trip, which results in an 8x performance improvement.
* __Parallel scans__ -- fetching large amounts of sequential data from RethinkDB now [scales linearly](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/4343) with the size of the cluster.
* __Improved memory usage__ -- memory overhead on large datasets has been [reduced](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/1951) by over 50%.
* __New ReQL commands__ -- We added a new `values` command, and [Peter Hollows](https://github.com/captainpete) expanded the `r.uuid` to support [user defined hashes](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/pull/4636).

## Atomic changefeeds

One of the most common patterns when building realtime web or mobile applications is to render the page and then update it any time there is new information. For example, if you're presenting your users with a leaderboard, you'd typically want to render the leaderboard right away, and then update it when it changes.

Prior to RethinkDB 2.2 you could accomplish it by running two separate queries -- one to fetch the initial data, and another to listen to changes:

```js
// Get the initial data for top ten players
var leaderboard = r.table('gameplays')
                   .orderBy({ index: r.desc('score') })
                   .limit(10)
                   .run(conn);
var changes = r.table('gameplays')
               .orderBy({ index: r.desc('score') })
               .limit(10)
               .changes()
               .run(conn);
```

There are two problems with this approach. Firstly, you have to write two different pieces of code -- one to handle the initial data, and one to handle the changes. While this doesn't present any insurmountable challenges, having to write code twice to process every piece of realtime data quickly becomes a significant burden in applications that heavily rely on realtime functionality.

The second problem is more serious -- the code above contains a race condition. There is a small gap between the time you get the initial results and the time you subscribe to a feed, and new data might slip in between the two queries. When that happens, you end up missing the change, and your users are left with inconsistent information.

RethinkDB 2.2 fixes both problems by introducing an `includeInitial` option to the `changes` command. When `includeInitial` is set to `true`, existing data is automatically injected into the changefeed:

```javascript
var leaders = r.table('gameplays')
               .orderBy({ index: r.desc('score') })
               .limit(10)
               .changes({ includeInitial: true })
               .run(conn);
```

The example above will give you the top ten players with the highest scores, in descending order. After it gives you the initial list, it will give you a stream of updates as the players scores change or when they are displaced by other players.

In previous versions of RethinkDB, changefeeds automatically include initial results for some queries (like the one above that uses `orderBy` and `limit` together) but not others, and there was no way to control this behavior. In RethinkDB 2.2, changefeeds only emit their initial results by default if you explicitly set `includeInitial` to `true`, and the option is now available on all changefeeds.

{% infobox %}
Note: this is a breaking change. Please update your applications to explicitly turn on `includeInitial` when you need it.
{% endinfobox %}

The availability of initial changefeed results simplifies realtime application development for many RethinkDB users, but it's especially worth noting that this feature brings us one big step closer to accommodating the requirements of the popular Meteor framework, and paves the way for a robust Meteor integration.

## Performance improvements

In addition to atomic changefeeds, the 2.2 release brings significant performance, scalability, and memory efficiency improvements.

You can expect to see [major performance gains][index-optimizations] for operations that rely on secondary indexes. In our internal benchmarks, a query that uses an index to count a million items went from 1.3 seconds in RethinkDB 2.1.0 to 0.5 seconds in 2.2.

We also worked to deliver better performance in cases where users stream large data sets with the Python client driver. An operation that involves reading 1 million documents that are roughly 200 bytes each went from 20 seconds in version 2.1 to 9.1 seconds in version 2.2.

Community member Adam Grandquist [contributed code][json-interface] that extends the Python client driver so that users can plug in third-party JSON parsing libraries like RapidJSON for faster document decoding. When we added RapidJSON to our benchmark configuration, the completion time of the million document benchmarked dropped even further, down to 6.7 seconds.

The performance of fetching a large number of documents is [improved even further](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/4343) if you're running a RethinkDB cluster. Table scans across multiple RethinkDB servers is now done in parallel, and you can expect linear scalability on table scans as of RethinkDB 2.2.

We've also significantly [reduced the memory][memory-reduction] overhead incurred when working with large datasets that are too big to fit in memory. The memory overhead in these cases has been reduced by over 50%.

The performance of the `getAll` command has also been significantly improved. If you're using `getAll` with multiple keys, you can expect performance improvements of up to 8x on common workloads.

## New ReQL commands

While most of the work in 2.2 released was focused on atomic changefeeds and performance improvements on high scale workloads, we've also added new ReQL commands that should make using RethinkDB more convenient.

In RethinkDB 2.2 we added a new `values` command that mirrors the existing `keys` command and allows getting field values from an object:

```js
// Returns `[1, 2]`
r.expr({ a: 1, b: 2}).values()
```

[Peter Hollows](https://github.com/captainpete) expanded the `r.uuid` to support [name-based UUIDs](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/pull/4636) using SHA1. You can now call `r.uuid(name)` in ReQL to get a name-based UUID.

We've also added a way for clients to [determine](https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/3934) which RethinkDB server they're connected to. You can call `conn.server` to get the server information on a connection.

## Download RethinkDB 2.2 today

For more details check out the [official release notes][release-notes]. To try the new release for yourself, [download and install][download] it today.

* Download [RethinkDB 2.2][download]
* Reach us on [Twitter][twitter]
* Start a thread in [our Google Group][group]
* Join us in the [#rethinkdb channel on Freenode][freenode]
* Read the [`includeInitial` documentation][include-initial-docs]

Special thanks to all the amazing contributors, users, and community members who helped improve the 2.2 release!

[index-optimizations]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/4862
[json-interface]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/pull/4825
[memory-reduction]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/1951
[twitter]: https://twitter.com/rethinkdb
[group]: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/rethinkdb
[freenode]: irc://chat.freenode.net/#rethinkdb
[release-notes]: #
[include-initial-docs]: #
[download]: http://rethinkdb.com/docs/install/
