---
layout: post
title: "Full-stack Ruby: build a realtime web app with React.rb and Opal"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
---

[Opal][] is a transpiler that converts Ruby code into browser-friendly
JavaScript, opening the door for developers to build frontend web applications
with Ruby. It's a particularly intriguing option for backend Ruby developers
who want to use the same language across their entire stack.

I recently gave Opal a try myself, incorporating it into a simple realtime todo
list demo that I built with RethinkDB and Ruby. My demo is a full-stack Ruby
application, with Sinatra on the backend and an Opal-based library called
[React.rb][] on the frontend. React.rb wraps Facebook's popular [React
framework][React], adapting it to support idiomatic Ruby conventions.
Developers can build React components in native Ruby, using a domain-specific
language (DSL) to describe the generated HTML markup.

After a fair amount of tinkering, I succeeded in making my demo application
work as expected. Although I found that both Opal and React.rb are still
somewhat experimental projects that need further development before they are
ready for serious use in production environments, they offer some fascinating
possibilities.

# Build the backend with RethinkDB and Sinatra

RethinkDB 2.0, released earlier this year, [introduced EventMachine
integration][async-drivers] in the Ruby client driver. Developers can use
EventMachine to perform RethinkDB queries in the background, which is ideal for
consuming [changefeeds][]. My demo application uses a changefeed to track
updates on the todo list and broadcast them to clients via WebSocket:

```ruby
EM.next_tick do
  conn = r.connect()
  r.table("todo").changes.em_run(conn) do |err, change|
    @clients.each {|c| c.send change.to_json }
  end
end
```

The backend also uses WebSockets to accept commands from the frontend. The
following code tracks WebSocket client connections and handles the incoming
commands, adding and updating todo list records as needed:

```ruby
def query rql
  rql.run(conn = r.connect()).to_json
ensure
  conn.close
end

def setup_websocket ws
  ws.on(:close) { @clients.delete ws }
  ws.on(:open) { @clients << ws }

  ws.on :message do |msg|
    data = JSON.parse msg.data
    case data["command"]
    when "add"
      query r.table("todo").insert text: data["text"], status: false
    when "update"
      query r.table("todo").get(data["id"]).update status: data["status"]
    when "delete"
      query r.table("todo").get(data["id"]).delete()
    end
  end
end
```

The main Sinatra route handler checks to see if the incoming request is a
WebSocket connection or a regular HTTP request. It will respond accordingly,
conveniently making it possible to handle both on the same port:

```ruby
get "/" do
  if Faye::WebSocket.websocket? request.env
    ws = Faye::WebSocket.new request.env
    setup_websocket ws
    ws.rack_response
  else
    haml :index
  end
end
```

I also use Sinatra to add conventional REST endpoints as needed. For example, I
make it possible to retrieve current todo list items with a simple GET request:

```ruby
get "/api/items" do
  query r.table("todo").coerce_to("array")
end
```

In my `config.ru` file, I used Opal's built-in [Sprockets
integration][sprockets] to configure an asset pipeline. This makes it possible
for Sinatra to dynamically serve transpiled assets in response to requests:

```ruby
Faye::WebSocket.load_adapter("thin")

react_path = ::React::Source.bundled_path_for("react-with-addons.js")

$opal = Opal::Server.new do |s|
  s.append_path File.dirname react_path
  s.append_path "client"
  s.main = "main"
end

map "/assets" do
  run $opal.sprockets
end

$opalinit = Opal::Processor.load_asset_code($opal.sprockets, 'main')
```

I also take the opportunity to add React.rb into the mix and configure the Faye
WebSockets library to use [Thin][], the underlying web server that runs the
application. I chose Thin because it plays nicely with EventMachine, which I
need for my background changefeed.

The global `$opalinit` variable contains a string of JavaScript code that the
page must execute to bootstrap the Opal environment. All you have to do is put
its contents into a script tag in the [HAML][] template:

```haml
!!!
%html
  %head
    %title Test
    %script(src="/assets/react-with-addons.js")
    %script(src="/assets/main.js")
    %script= $opalinit
  %body
```

# Build the frontend with React.rb and Opal

Developers who have previous experience with [React][] can expect a relatively
easy transition working with React.rb. It's largely a wrapper, but it does a
nice job of adapting React's underlying concepts so that you can express all of
the same functionality in Ruby.

React applications consist of components, which the developer composes to build
their frontend. Inside of the component, there's a `render` function that
generates the associated HTML markup. Components can also emit signals that are
handled by parent components. In general, React developers try to minimize the
amount of stateful data managed by individual components.

To create a component with React.rb, you define a class and include the
`React::Component` mixin. Inside of the component's `render` method, you can
use the React.rb templating DSL to build your markup. The following component
enables the user to input a new todo list item:

```ruby
class TodoAdd
  include React::Component

  def render
    div do
      input(type: "text", placeholder: "Input task name", ref: "text")
      button {"Add"}.on(:click) do
        text = self.refs[:text].dom_node.value
        self.emit :add, text: text
      end
    end
  end
end
```

It includes a text entry field and a submission button. When the user clicks
the button, the application will execute the `on(:click)` block, which emits a
signal with the contents of the entry box. I also made a component that
displays all of the todo list items, emitting a signal when the user toggles
one of the checkboxes:

```ruby
class TodoList
  include React::Component

  def render
    ul do
      params[:items].each do |item|
        li do
          label do
            input(type: "checkbox", checked: item["status"]).on(:click) do |e|
              self.emit :toggle, id: item["id"], status: e.current_target.checked
            end
            span { item["text"] }
          end
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

The todo list component doesn't actually store the todo list items itself, it
attaches to an `items` parameter that is provided by the parent component in
which it is instantiated. Here's the top-level component that sets up the
application:

```ruby
class App
  include React::Component

  define_state(:items) { [] }
  after_mount :setup

  def setup
    Browser::HTTP.get("/api/items").then do |res|
      self.items = res.json
      setup_websocket
    end
  end

  def setup_websocket
    @ws = Browser::Socket.new()

    @ws.on(:open) { p "Connection opened" }
    @ws.on(:close) { p "Socket closed" }

    # ... handle WebSocket messages here
  end

  def transmit data
    @ws.puts data.to_json
  end

  def render
    div do
      present(TodoList, items: self.items).on :toggle do |data|
        transmit command: "update", id: data["id"], status: data["status"]
      end

      present(TodoAdd).on :add do |data|
        transmit command: "add", text: data["text"]
      end
    end
  end
end

$document.ready do
  React.render(React.create_element(App), `document.body`)
end
```

It creates the `items` property, which it initially populates by fetching data
from the API endpoint defined in Sinatra. In the `render` method, it displays
the `TodoList` component and the `TodoAdd` component. When the user adds or
toggles a todo list item, the signal handlers will send the appropriate command
to the backend via WebSocket.

The `Browser::Socket` class, which I use to create the WebSocket client
connection, comes from a library called [opal-browser][]. In addition to
WebSocket support, the library provides Ruby-friendly wrappers around many
different standard browser APIs.

With all of that plumbing in place, all the application needs is an
`on(:message)` handler to perform the necessary changes to the todo list when
the application receives live updates from the backend changefeed via
WebSocket:

```ruby
@ws.on(:message) do |e|
  data = JSON.parse e.data
  puts "Received:", data

  # Add new item
  if data[:new_val] && !data[:old_val]
    self.items = self.items << data[:new_val]
  # Update existing item
  elsif data[:new_val] && data[:old_val]
    self.items = self.items.map do |i|
      i["id"] == data[:new_val]["id"] ? data[:new_val] : i
    end
  # Remove deleted item
  elsif !data[:new_val] && data[:old_val]
    self.items = self.items - [data[:old_val]]
  end
end
```

# Caveats and next steps

Although I'm enthusiastic about Opal's long-term potential, I did face some
challenges while I was attempting to build the demo. Parts of the Opal project,
particularly the associated libraries like opal-browser, are fragile and
under-documented. My initial attempts at using the Opal project's [Vienna
framework][vienna] instead of React.rb were largely unsuccessful.

I also faced some difficulty with debugging while working with Opal. Unlike
CoffeeScript, Opal doesn't really produce a clean 1:1 translation of the code.
In order to provide some of the capabilities and behaviors that you would
expect to find in a real Ruby environment, it uses a fair amount of runtime
code. As a result, the tracebacks and error messages are often very unhelpful.
There is, however, some [support for source maps][source-maps], which can take
some of the pain out of debugging.

All of those caveats aside, building a demo app that uses Ruby on both the
frontend and the backend was an exhilarating experience. Transpilers play an
increasingly foundational role in web application development. As projects like
[WebAssembly][] gain momentum and make JavaScript a better target for
transpilers, I think we can expect to see projects like Opal become better and
more practical for day-to-day use. It might not take long for this kind of
full-stack Ruby web development to evolve from an esoteric curiosity to a
real-world option.

To get started with RethinkDB today, visit our [ten-minute guide][10min]. To
learn more about Opal, visit the [Opal][] website.

**Resources:**

* [The official Opal website][Opal]
* [The React.rb project on GitHub][React.rb]
* [The complete source code of the todo list demo][ghrepo]

[Opal]: http://opalrb.org/
[React.rb]: https://github.com/zetachang/react.rb
[React]: https://facebook.github.io/react/
[async-drivers]: /blog/async-drivers/
[changefeeds]: /docs/changefeeds/javascript/
[sprockets]: http://opalrb.org/docs/guides/0-8-stable/sinatra.html
[thin]: http://code.macournoyer.com/thin/
[HAML]: http://haml.info/
[React]: https://facebook.github.io/react/
[source-maps]: http://opalrb.org/docs/guides/0-8-stable/source_maps.html
[vienna]: https://github.com/opal/vienna
[WebAssembly]: https://brendaneich.com/2015/06/from-asm-js-to-webassembly/
[10min]: http://rethinkdb.com/docs/guide/ruby/
[ghrepo]: https://github.com/segphault/rethinkdb-ruby-opal


