---
layout: post
title: "RethinkDB 2.1 beta: announcing automatic failover"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
hero_image: 2015-07-15-forbidden-planet-beta-banner.jpg
---

RethinkDB 2.1 beta is [now available for testing][download]. The upcoming 2.1
release will introduce important improvements, including support for automatic
failover. Although we're still hard at work on the finishing touches that will
make the new features ready for production use, the beta offers an opportunity
to get an early look.

Automatic failover increases the reliability of RethinkDB clusters, reducing
the risk of downtime when individual servers fail or drop out of the network.
When a server with a primary shard experiences failure, the  servers with
remaining replicas elect an acting primary to take its place until the wayward
server is either restored or permanently removed from the table configuration.
As long as a majority of replicas remain operational to elect an acting
primary, the loss of a primary shard will no longer compromise database
availability.

<!--more-->

Our automatic failover implementation is built with the [Raft][] consensus
algorithm. [First introduced][paper] in 2013 by Stanford researchers, Raft's
influence is growing quickly in distributed computing and related fields. In
RethinkDB 2.1, Raft provides the underlying logic that enables replicas to
elect an acting primary.

The work to bring automatic failover to RethinkDB brought a number of ancillary
improvements that you will also find in the 2.1 release. In general, cluster
behavior is more forgiving in instances where individual servers fail. For
example, you no longer have to permanently remove a failed server from the
cluster in order to perform tasks like table creation. Another improvement in
version 2.1 is that tables remain largely accessible during resharding, with
only a few seconds of unavailability when the server switches over a shard to a
new server.

This beta release is intended for testing and evaluation purposes.  We are
eager to get feedback from users to help guide our efforts as we put the
finishing touches on version 2.1.

# Help test the beta release

* [Download the RethinkDB 2.1 beta release][download]
* [Open an issue on GitHub][issues]
* [Start a thread in our Google Group][group]
* [Join us in the #rethinkdb channel on Freenode][irc]
* [Ask a question at #rethinkdb on gitter.im][gitter]

[download]: #
[gitter]: https://gitter.im/rethinkdb/rethinkdb
[group]: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/rethinkdb
[irc]: irc://chat.freenode.net/#rethinkdb
[issues]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues
[paper]: http://ramcloud.stanford.edu/raft.pdf
[Raft]: https://raftconsensus.github.io/
