---
layout: post
title: "RethinkDB year in review: looking back on 2015"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
---

As the end of the year approaches, we'd like to take this opportunity to
reflect on some of the significant events and community contributions that
made 2015 great.

# RethinkDB Releases in 2015

* We started 2015 with the release of [RethinkDB 1.16][release116], which
made it possible to use changefeeds with a wide range of arbitrary
queries. Version 1.16 also included new ReQL-based cluster configuration
and monitoring APIs.
* In April 2015, we announced the release of [RethinkDB 2.0][release2],
the first version that we declared ready for use in production
environments. After five years of development and sixteen major
releases, we determined that RethinkDB was ready for widespread
adoption.
* We followed it up with the release of [version 2.1][release21] in
August, which added high availability clustering and automatic failover
via the Raft consensus algorithm. The 2.1 release also brought `asyncio`
support to the Python client driver.
* We released [version 2.2][release22] in November with atomic
changefeeds, which make it possible to retrieve the initial values when
you attach a changefeed to a query. The release also included a number
of important performance and memory footprint optimizations.

<!--more-->

# The evolving RethinkDB ecosystem

* We built our own [Java client driver][java-driver] for RethinkDB,
extending the number of officially supported languages to four. The Java
driver natively supports Java 8 and also holds the potential to bring
ReQL to [other languages][alt-jvm] in the JVM landscape.
* The number of [third-party client drivers][drivers] continued to grow
in 2015. There are now over 20 active community drivers built with our new
JSON wire protocol, for languages ranging from C# to Swift.
* [Dan Cannon's][dan-cannon] [Go client driver][go-driver], which is one
of the most popular and well-maintained third-party RethinkDB client
libraries, reached version 1.0 and was declared
[production-ready][go-production] in July.
* We started work on an [official Windows port][windows-port] of
RethinkDB. An early alpha release is already available for testing.
Windows users can expect feature-parity on their platform.
* Docker [announced][docker-announce] the availability of an [official
RethinkDB image][docker-official] in the Docker Hub. The initial work
for the Docker image was undertaken by community member
[Stuart Bentley][stuart-bentley], who also built a RethinkDB
[Dokku plugin][dokku-plugin]. We recently took on maintainership of
the Docker image so that we can keep it up-to-date ourselves as
release new versions.
* Our friends at [Compose.io][compose] began to [offer RethinkDB cloud
hosting][rethinkdb-hosting] last year. In 2015, their RethinkDB hosting
[emerged from beta][compose-official] as an officially-supported
service. They were recently acquired by IBM and continue to offer great
RethinkDB hosting under the IBM Bluemix umbrella.
* Developers behind third-party libraries and frameworks like
[LoopBack][loopback], [Meteor][meteor], and [Deepstream][deepstream]
explored opportunities for RethinkDB integration.

# The growing RethinkDB community

* At the close of 2015, RethinkDB has over 100,000 users. [On GitHub][gh],
we're now the most popular document database with over 11,400 stars.
RethinkDB has over 32,200 commits and over 1,100 community
contributions.
* We now have 9 official meetup groups worldwide, in locations ranging
from San Francisco to Mumbai. We sent countless t-shirts to RethinkDB
users this year, through our [shirts-for-stories][shirts] program.
* We launched a [public Slack group][rethink-slack] for our community in
October.

# Exciting plans for 2016

We've had a great year in 2015. We're looking forward to seeing this great
momentum continue in the coming year. We're working on some exciting
projects that we can hardly wait to share. We're really grateful to the
users and amazing community members who are sharing this journey with us.
We want to wish you all a happy new year. Thanks!

[release116]: /blog/1.16-release/
[release2]: /blog/2.0-release
[release21]: /blog/2.1-release
[release22]: /blog/2.2-release
[java-driver]: /blog/official-java-driver/
[alt-jvm]: /blog/alt-jvm-driver/
[drivers]: /docs/install-drivers/
[go-driver]: https://github.com/dancannon/gorethink
[dan-cannon]: https://twitter.com/_dancannon
[go-production]: /blog/go-production-ready/
[docker-announce]: /blog/docker-repo/
[docker-official]: https://registry.hub.docker.com/_/rethinkdb/
[stuart-bentley]: https://github.com/stuartpb
[dokku-plugin]: /blog/dokku-deployment/
[compose]: http://compose.io
[rethinkdb-hosting]: /blog/compose/
[compose-official]: /blog/compose-2.1/
[loopback]: https://strongloop.com/strongblog/rethinkdb-connector-loopback-node-js-framework/
[meteor]: /blog/meteor-loopback-integration/
[deepstream]: /blog/deepstream/
[windows-port]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/1100
[gh]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb
[shirts]: https://www.rethinkdb.com/community/shirts-for-stories/
[rethink-slack]: /blog/community-slack/
