---
layout: post
title: "An early look at three high-impact ES6 features coming soon to Node.js"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
hero_image: 2016-02-22-v849-es6-features-banner.png
---

Google is currently developing [V8 4.9][49post], which will ship in the
upcoming Chrome 49 release. V8 4.9 is a particularly exciting update,
because it includes support for 91% of the ECMAScript 2015 (ES6) standard.
When Node.js 6 launches with these V8 improvements, powerful new language
features like destructuring assignment and proxies will work out of the
box--without requiring special measures like command line flags or
transpilers.

Although Node 6.0 isn't scheduled for release until April, you can
experience a little bit of the future today by compiling Node's
[`vee-eight-4.9` branch][49branch] from source code. The `vee-eight`
branches are where Node's maintainers do the heavy lifting to make Node
compatible with new versions of V8. The code from these branches is
understandably not suitable for use in production environments, but it's a
fun a way to get an early look at coming improvements.

In this blog post, I'm going to walk you through a handful of the new ES6
features that you can use out of the box in the `vee-eight-4.9` branch. It's
worth noting that many of these features are also available for testing in
Node 5.x by using [Babel][] or command line flags if you want to follow
along without compiling.

<!--more-->

# Destructuring assignment

Destructuring assignment gives you a succinct way to extract multiple values
from objects and arrays and then assign them to variables. It is especially
useful when you want to reach into nested objects with multiple levels of
depth.

The following example shows you how to extract a single property value from
a JavaScript object and assign it to a variable with the same name as the
property:

```javascript
var person = {
  name: {first: "Jean-Luc", last: "Picard"},
  ship: {name: "Enterprise", registry: "NCC-1701-E"},
  rank: "Captain"
};

var {rank} = person;
console.log(rank); 
```

The example above creates a `rank` variable that contains the value of the
`person` object's `rank` property. When you run that code, it will print the
word "Captain" to the console. To assign the value to a specific variable
name instead of a variable name that matches the name of the property, you
can use the following form instead:

```javascript
var {rank: myRankVar} = person;
console.log(myRankVar); 
```

The syntax on the left-hand side of the assignment looks a lot like an
object literal. If you want to retrieve a value that is multiple levels
deep, you can nest the structure. You can also extract multiple variables at
the same time by separating the properties with a comma:

```javascript
var {name: {first}, ship: {name: shipName}} = person;
console.log(first, shipName);
```

You can use destructuring assignment inside of `for` loops, extracting
specific properties from each object in a sequence. I find that feature
particularly useful in RethinkDB applications when I'm iterating over a set
of JSON objects returned by a ReQL query:

```javascript
co(function*() {
  var conn = yield r.connect();
  var response = yield r.table("scoreboard")
                        .orderBy(r.desc("points"))
                        .limit(5).run(conn);

  for (var {name, points} of response)
    console.log(`${name} has ${points} points`);

  conn.close();
});
```

The example above shows how to extract the `name` and `points` properties
from the first five records in the `scoreboard` table when it is ordered by
the highest score.

In addition to destructuring assignment, the example uses several ES6
features that were previously introduced in Node: template strings,
generators, and `of` loops. To learn about those features, you can refer to
the post I wrote last year about [ES6 features in Node 4][node4post].  

# Default parameter values

ES6 finally makes it possible for JavaScript developers to specify default
values for function parameters. When the user invokes a function, the
default value will stand in for any missing arguments:

```javascript
function fn(x = 1, y = 2) {
  return x + y;
}

console.log(fn() == 3);
```

The real power of this feature emerges when you use it with destructuring.
You can access properties that are deeply nested in objects, falling back on
default values when the properties are undefined. Parameter destructuring is
tremendously useful for functions that accept complex configuration objects.

JavaScript programmers often use the logical or operator for null
coalescing, like this:

```javascript
function fn(opts) {
  var opts = opts || {};
  var myopt = opts.myopt || "default value";
}
```

With destructuring and default parameter values, we can express the same
behavior in a way that is much cleaner and easier to write:

```javascript
function fn({myopt = "default value"} = {}) {
}
```

You can also use parameter destructuring in anonymous functions, which is
often useful when you perform operations like `map` and `filter`. You could
use `map` instead of a `for` loop to perform the scoreboard example that I
included earlier in the blog post:

```javascript
console.log(response.map(
  ({name, points}) => `${name} has ${points} points`).join("\n"));
```

Keep in mind that you can't use parameter destructuring inside a ReQL
expression. ReQL expressions evaluate into data structures that the
JavaScript client driver translates into the RethinkDB wire protocol. The
way that parameter destructuring is parsed and processed by the JavaScript
runtime precludes incorporating it into ReQL.

# Spread operator

ES6 brings JavaScript the spread operator, which is expressed by typing
three periods. The spread operator expands an array by pulling the internal
values into the parent context. It's similar to the "splat" operator
available in other programming languages. Here's an example of how you can
use it to combine arrays without `concat` or `push.apply`:

```javascript
var values = [4,5,6];
[1,2,3, ...values] == [1,2,3,4,5,6];
```

Developers often use `apply` when they want to pass an array to functions
like `Math.max` that take a top-level set of arguments. You can generally
use the spread operator in any case where you might have considered using
`apply` in the past:

```javascript
Math.max.apply(null, [4, 3, 8, 5]) == 8;
Math.max(...[4, 3, 8, 5]) == 8;
```

I find the spread operator useful in RethinkDB applications when I'm
inserting multiple arrays with records into a table. Without the operator,
I'd typically have to concatenate the arrays. The operator lets me do it in
place:

```javascript
r.table("example").insert([...group1, ...group2, ...group3]);
```

The spread operator itself was technically first introduced in Node 5.x, but it gains
some new abilities in V8 4.9 and composes well with other new ES6 features
introduced in the update. You can use the spread operator with assignment destructuring,
giving you the ability to extract array subsets into different variables:

```javascript
[first, second, ...rest] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
console.log(rest == [3, 4, 5]);
```

You can also use the spread operator in a function signature when defining
parameters. It will take top-level arguments and turn them into an array:

```javscript
function fn(...rest) {
  return rest.map(x => x * 2);
}

fn(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) == [2, 4, 6, 8, 10];
```

When I build a RethinkDB application, I often write some setup code that
creates the desired tables if they don't already exist. I can use the spread
operator to make a nice convenience function that wraps that operation:

```javascript
function createTables(db, ...tables) {
  return r.expr(tables)
          .difference(r.db(db).tableList())
          .forEach(r.db(db).tableCreate(r.row));
}

createTables("mydb", "table1", "table2", "table3").run(conn);
```

The first parameter is the name of the database where I want to store the
new tables. The rest of the parameters are the names of the tables that I
want to create.

# Next steps

The features described in this blog post are some of most easily applicable
language additions in V8 4.9, but there are others that are also worth
exploring. Most notably, [proxy objects][], which let you override property
access and other behaviors for wrapped objects. Several ES6 features that
previously required strict mode are now generally available, including
[classes][] and the `let` and `const` keywords.

To try the `vee-eight-4.9` branch yourself, you can clone it
[from GitHub][49branch] and follow the installation instructions.
If you'd like to learn more about RethinkDB, check out our
[10-minute guide][10min].

**Resources**:

* [The official V8 blog][49post]
* [Overview of ES6 features][es6overview]
* [NodeJS V8 4.9 branch on GitHub][49branch]

[49post]: http://v8project.blogspot.com/2016/01/v8-release-49.html
[49branch]: https://github.com/nodejs/node/tree/vee-eight-4.9
[Babel]: https://babeljs.io/
[node4post]: /blog/node-4/
[proxy objects]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy
[classes]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes
[10min]: /docs/guide/javascript/
[es6overview]: http://es6-features.org/
