---
layout: post
title: "RethinkDB 2.3: user accounts, network encryption, Windows support"
author: Ryan Paul
author_github: segphault
---

Today we're pleased to announce the release of RethinkDB 2.3 (Fantasia). [Download it now][download]!

RethinkDB 2.3 has new security features that bring more flexibility to database
deployment and administration. The update also includes performance
improvements, a handful of new ReQL features, and a beta release of our
recently-introduced Windows port. Here are some of the highlights:

* **Network encryption:** built-in TLS support encrypts database connections
* **Users and permissions:** you can achieve granular control over database access by creating user accounts and assigning permissions
* **The `fold` command:** we added a new `fold` command to the ReQL query language that lets you perform `reduce`-like operations on ordered streams, with optional support for emitting a stream of values based on the current accumulator state.
* **Windows compatibility:** support for running RethinkDB on Windows is now in beta. You can download and install RethinkDB 2.3 on Microsoft's operating system.

<!--more-->

# Network encryption

RethinkDB 2.3 includes TLS support, contributed by [Josh Hawn][]. Josh
integrated OpenSSL, enabling encryption on the wire for both the client driver
protocol and communication between database servers in a cluster. This update
also brings encryption to RethinkDB's web-based administrative user interface,
which you can now access with an HTTPS URL.

In conventional RethinkDB deployments, users typically run their application
server within the same closed network as their database servers. In that
specific kind of environment, where the database isn't exposed to the public
internet, there's typically little need for encryption.

There are, however, many deployment scenarios where encryption is desirable.
Support for TLS gives users more flexibility, supporting a broader range of
deployment configurations. You no longer have to rely on SSH tunneling and
other similar measures to facilitate secure remote access to a RethinkDB
cluster.

When you launch RethinkDB from the command line, you can turn on TLS by using
the [relevant command line parameters][tls-docs] to point to the desired
certificates.

# Access control

RethinkDB 2.3 introduces access control, in the form of user accounts and
permissions. You can apply permissions to the entire cluster, an individual
database, or a table within a database. Permissions control a given user's
access to the specified resource. RethinkDB supports the following permissions:

* `read`: allows the user to access and read documents
* `write`: allows the user to insert, modify, and delete documents
* `config`: allows the user to modify settings

There's also a special `connect` permission (only configurable at the top
level) that controls whether the user can access the outside world with the
`r.http` command.

RethinkDB 2.3 adds two new [system tables][] that contain access control
settings. The new `users` table contains all of the RethinkDB user accounts.
Each account is stored as a separate document, with a unique username as the
`id` value. There's also a `permissions` table, which contains documents that
describe the permissions assigned to users in various contexts.

User administration is easy, powered by the database itself. To create a new
user account, all you have to do is perform a ReQL query that inserts a new
record in the `users` table. To assign permissions, you can use the new `grant`
command. The following example shows how to create a new user and grant that
user `read`, `write`, and `config` permissions on a database called `test`:

```javascript
r.db("rethinkdb").table("users").insert({id: "skyla", password: "r3dd0t"})
r.db("test").grant("skyla", {read: true, write: true, config: true})
```

Under the hood, RethinkDB operations that write to the `users` table will
automatically hash and salt the string value provided for the `password`
property. When you view the contents of the table, it shows a boolean value for
that field (indicating whether there is a password) instead of the underlying
hashed string.

The `grant` command takes the name of the user and an object with the desired
permission assignments. In the example above, I chained the `grant` command to
a database to apply the permissions to that scope. If you use `r.grant` instead
of chaining it to a database or table, you can set a user's permissions
globally for the cluster.

Out of the box, RethinkDB comes with an "admin" account that requires no
password. With the default configuration, you don't need to provide any
credentials to establish a connection: you can continue using the database
exactly as you did before. If you want to enable access control, you can modify
the "admin" document in the `users` table and add a `password` field. You can
create additional users and configure permissions as needed.

Database client drivers use a [SCRAM][] exchange to authenticate the user.
SCRAM's challenge and response model ensures that the authentication process is
secure even without TLS enabled.

Although you can use access control securely without TLS, keep in mind that
conventional ReQL operations are visible on the wire if you don't have TLS
enabled. If you perform ReQL commands that contain passwords, like the example
above that inserts a new document into the `users` table, you should consider
using an encrypted client connection.

Supporting SCRAM required some changes to the RethinkDB client protocol.
Developers who want to support the feature in their own client drivers can
refer to the [protocol documentation][client-proto-doc].

The new access control features are largely designed to reduce the impact of
potential security breaches and prevent accidental interference between
multiple applications using the same database cluster. At the present time, we
don't recommend mapping users of your application to database user accounts or
similarly exposing the database's access control system as a security mechanism
in your applications.

Regardless of configured permissions, there are still a number of malicious
things that an authenticated user can do to disrupt the database. For example,
a user can perform queries that effectively act as a denial of service, soaking
up excessive resources. Quotas and other features that would prevent against
such attacks are not yet supported.

# ReQL improvements

We added several new features to RethinkDB's ReQL query language in version
2.3. The most notable addition is a new command called [`fold`][fold-doc]. It's
similar to the `reduce` command, but it takes a starting value as the first
parameter and it operates on streams in sequential order. Here's a really
simple (and somewhat contrived) example that shows how you'd use the `fold`
function to add up all the elements in a `range`:

```javascript
r.range(10).fold(0, (x, y) => x.add(y))
```

The `fold` command also takes an optional `emit` argument which accepts an
anonymous function that returns an array. The output is a stream in which all
of the returned arrays are concatenated. The following example shows how to use
the `fold` command to perform a query that collects every third item in an
ordered sequence: 

```javascript
r.table("items")
 .orderBy(r.desc("score"))
 .fold(0, (prev, cur) => prev.add(1),
   {emit: (prev, row, cur) => r.branch(prev.mod(3).eq(0), [row], [])})
```

Another noteworthy ReQL improvement in this release is support for attaching a
changefeed to the [`getIntersecting`][get-intersect] command, a feature that
will make it easier for location-aware apps to notify users of nearby activity.
You can look at the relevant tag in the [RethinkDB issue tracker][reql-tracker]
for more details about the 16 ReQL improvements in the 2.3 release.

On the performance front, we rewrote the `eqJoin` command from the ground up to
significantly improve its efficiency and scalability in clustered environments.
In common scenarios that involve distributed `eqJoin` operations, you can
expect the operation to run as much as ten times faster in RethinkDB 2.3.

# Windows port

RethinkDB 2.3 is the first release to ship simultaneously on Windows alongside
Linux and Mac OS X. As we discussed in a [blog post][win-blog] last month when
we released an early developer preview, RethinkDB's native Windows
compatibility is the result of an intensive year-long engineering effort that
touched nearly every part of the database.

As of the 2.3 release, RethinkDB on Windows is officially in beta. You
shouldn't trust it with your data or deploy it in production environments yet,
but it's a great option for a developer who wants to start building RethinkDB
applications on a Windows PC.

# Download RethinkDB 2.3 today

For more details, check out the [official release notes][rel-notes]. To try the
new release for yourself, [download and install][download] it today.

* Download [RethinkDB 2.3][download]
* Reach us on [Twitter][twitter]
* Start a thread in [our Google Group][group]
* Join us in the [#rethinkdb channel on Freenode][freenode]
* Join us in our [community Slack group][slack]

[download]: /docs/install/
[tls-contrib]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/3151
[Josh Hawn]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues/3151
[tls-docs]: #
[SCRAM]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5802
[system tables]: https://www.rethinkdb.com/docs/system-tables/
[client-proto-doc]: #
[fold-doc]: #
[win-blog]: /blog/rethinkdb-windows-preview/
[twitter]: https://twitter.com/rethinkdb
[group]: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/rethinkdb
[freenode]: irc://chat.freenode.net/#rethinkdb
[slack]: http://slack.rethinkdb.com/
[rel-notes]: #
[reql-tracker]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/rethinkdb/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2.3+label%3Acp%3Areql+is%3Aclosed
